the next time you buy a can soft drink
consider this that aluminum can will
always be recyclable unlike plastic
aluminum never deteriorates no matter
how often it's melted down and used
again aluminum cans are so lightweight
that it's hard to believe they're made
from a huge roll of aluminum sheeting
that weighs almost 10 tons the sheet is
about five feet wide and is thin as
construction paper a roll like this is
long enough to make three quarters of a
million drink cans the sheet feeds into
a press that punches out round pieces
that will be formed into cans the punch
press actually performs two operations
it punches at a disk five-and-a-half
inches in diameter
then bends it into a cup
what's left of the sheet gets compacted
and sent back to the aluminum factory
where it's recycled into new roles
the cup goes into a machine called the
draw and iron body maker a tool draws
out the aluminum forming the body of the
can the tool is lubricated so it won't
tear the aluminum while stretching the
lubricant also acts as a coolant because
the aluminum heats up as it's being
worked once the body is formed a trimmer
cleans and straightens the edge
now the cans move along upside down on
the conveyor belt over to the washer
the washer performs a six-stage cleaning
the first two washes are in hydrofluoric
acid at 140 degrees the last four washes
are in deionized water neutral water
with no pH also at 140 degrees
the cans come out of the washer and go
under a hot air dryer there now shiny
because the hydrofluoric acid wash
removed a thin surface layer of aluminum
next a roller passes over the cans
coating the bottom rims with varnish
this varnish coating allows the cans to
slide easily on the conveyor belts and
into vending machines
it shows up as a blue ring under an
ultraviolet light the cans are now ready
to be printed this rotation printing
system can apply up to five colors one
at a time
the machine then applies a layer of
varnish to protect the ink
this is what the print and varnish
process looks like in slow motion and
here's the actual speed 1,800 cans per
minute
next the cans fly through an oven that
instantly hardens the ink and dries the
protective varnish the next machine
sprays a water-based varnish on the
inside of the cans this creates a
barrier between the drink and the
aluminum so the drink won't end up
tasting like metal it also prevents the
aluminum from being eaten away from the
inside by the acid and carbonated drinks
next the cans go through a machine
called the Necker which forms a 2-inch
neck on the can this is done gradually
in 11 steps so as not to puncture the
paper-thin aluminum the next machine
called the flanger forms a curved over
edge at the top of the can which will
later attach to the pull tab cover
the cans pass through a sophisticated
vision system that photographs the
inside of each can any can that doesn't
meet standards that has a pump or ink
inside for example is automatically
removed from the production line they
strap to finish cans onto a pallet from
here they're shipped to the drink
company which fills them and then
attaches the pull-tab cover